The Project Gutenberg eBook of The happiness of Hazelbrook

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The happiness of Hazelbrook

Author: Charlotte Grace O'Brien

Release date: February 26, 2026 [eBook #78045]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Religious Tract Society, 1908


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAPPINESS OF HAZELBROOK ***

Transcriber's note: Unusual and inconsistent spelling is as printed.



[Illustration: SHE LAY QUITE MOTIONLESS.]



                                THE

                            HAPPINESS OF

                             HAZELBROOK


                          By the Author of

                   "Harry Blake's Trouble," etc.

                        [Charlotte O'Brien]



             R.T.S., 4 Bouverie Street, London, E.C. 4



[Illustration]



                              CONTENTS

CHAP.

    I. DUTY AND PLEASURE

   II. THE HAPPINESS OF HAZELBROOK

  III. GOING TO THE FAIR

   IV. THE SHADOW OF DEATH

    V. THE HAPPY ISLAND

   VI. THE RETURN OF THE PRODIGAL

  VII. SAFE AT HOME



                          THE HAPPINESS OF

                             HAZELBROOK

CHAPTER I

Duty and Pleasure

"NOW, Katie, you'll be able to finish that shirt easily by the time I
come home this evening," said Mrs. Lawrence, as she was preparing to
leave home one morning for a day's washing at the rectory.

"Oh yes, mother; I have only the two sleeves to make and put in, and
both wristbands are stitched already."

"That's right; then my mind will be at ease about the shirts. You know
I promised Mrs. Gordon to let her have them to-night, as she is leaving
Hazelbrook to-morrow morning. And if I thought you couldn't finish the
one you have in hand, I'd stay at home myself and see to it. But the
day's washing is an object to me, so if I can depend upon your sitting
steadily to work—"

"That you may, mother; I shan't stir till I have finished it."

"There's Ben's dinner all ready in the basin; you can just put it into
the oven for a short time before you send it. And Willie and Tom will
take it when they come home from school."

"All right, mother."

"And don't let little Esther get into any mischief. Keep her in with
you as much as you can, Katie; she plays very well by herself, and
it's much better for her than running about all the morning with the
children of the village. Besides, she will amuse Nelly if she stays
indoors."

As Mrs. Lawrence spoke, she stooped to kiss a pale, sickly-looking
little girl, about ten years old, who was lying upon a little bed near
the window.

"I will look after Esther, mother," said the child, in a feeble voice:
"I wish I could do some work to help you, that I do." And the tears
came into Nelly's eyes as she spoke.

"Don't fret about that, Nelly; some day, please God, you'll be able to
help me;—it's not the will that's wanting, anyhow, I know that quite
well. Meantime, you've got your own work to do, as our minister used
often to say to me; there's no one but has work to do in the world,
however rich he may be."

"Why, mother, what work can Nelly possibly have to do?" said Katie.

"Nelly has to pray to God to make her patient under the trial He
has sent her," replied her mother—"to keep from murmuring, or being
discontented."

"I shouldn't think that was very hard," interrupted Katie. She was
about to add that her sister had no needlework to do, but something
kept her silent.

"I should like to see 'you' try for a week, Katie," said her mother.

Katie blushed and said nothing.

"It is not so very easy, as you think, to lie patiently day after day,
and week after week; and it is only God's grace that can enable Nelly
to do so, Katie; but He never yet sent a burden so heavy that He did
not at the same time send strength enough to carry it; that is, if we
ask Him for it. But I must go now, so be good children, and mind you
keep to your work, Katie."

"Of course I will, mother," answered the young girl, rather pertly, as
if offended at being reminded so often.

And yet Katie's conscience must have told her that her mother had too
good cause for complaint. Katie Lawrence was nearly thirteen. She was
a sharp, clever girl, quick at her needle, and might have been of
the greatest use to her mother, had it not been for the sad habit of
neglecting her duty. Hers was truly but "eye-service." So long as her
mother worked beside her, Katie's needle moved rapidly and steadily.
But once let Mrs. Lawrence be called away by any business, and there
was an end to all Katie's industry. First she would begin to yawn, then
down would go her work, and she would be off into the garden to look
at the chickens, or feed the pig, or anything, in fact, but sit to her
needlework.

Mrs. Lawrence was most anxious to bring up her children to habits of
industry, and had a great objection to Katie wasting her time with
all the idle girls of the village, in whose company her mother felt
sure she would learn nothing that was good. She therefore forbade her
daughter going out without her consent. And Katie would promise, and,
at the moment, intend to obey her mother's wishes. But no sooner was
her mother's back turned, than her promised obedience was forgotten.
This was the more blameable in Katie, because she was quite old enough
to know what a hard struggle her mother had to make both ends meet.

There was not a prettier cottage in Hazelbrook than that of Widow
Lawrence, and it was as neat and clean as it was pretty. When
hard-working Ben Lawrence died of the typhus fever, three years before
this story begins, the villagers shook their heads, and said that poor
Mrs. Lawrence would never be able to get along with her six children,
and one of them a cripple too. And some even went so far as to advise
her to give up her home and go into the workhouse.

But the widow had a stout heart within her, and, in humble faith on
God's promise to befriend the fatherless and the widow, she aroused
herself, after the first heavy shock of her great grief, and determined
to put her shoulder to the wheel, and do what she could for her
fatherless children.

The eldest boy, Ben, was engaged as ploughboy at Farmer Hall's, and
earned three shillings a week. Mrs. Lawrence herself went every Tuesday
to the rectory to assist in the washing. This brought her in two
shillings. Added to this, the parish agreed to allow her half a crown
a week, which made a total of seven-and-sixpence. And as she was a
first-rate needlewoman, she hoped that what she and Katie could earn
by plain work, in addition to the above, would enable her, with strict
economy, to pay her way and keep out of debt.

It was often a hard struggle, but Mrs. Lawrence managed still to
keep her ground; and her cottage, although one of the poorest in the
village, was, as we said before, one of the neatest and prettiest. Her
husband had been very fond of gardening, and had taken great pains with
the little piece of ground. It was well stocked with fruit-trees, and
produced sufficient potatoes to last the family for the year.

Ben had been accustomed to assist his father, and was now able to take
the entire charge of the garden, which it was his pride and pleasure
to attend to of an evening, after he came home from work. He was the
eldest of the family, and was just fourteen years old. Poor little
Nelly had been a cripple from an infant. She had had a fall which
injured her spine, and for several years had not been able to put her
foot to the ground.

Some medical men expressed their opinion that the little girl would
become stronger as she grew older, and that she might yet be able to
earn her living by needlework, or some simple occupation. But up to
the present time, she had lain on her back, and could not move without
great pain. She required more nourishing food than her mother could
afford to give her, and it was one of Mrs. Lawrence's greatest trials
to feel she could not get Nelly all that she required.

She was a patient, even a cheerful child. God had mercifully, in her
case, 'tempered the wind to the shorn lamb,' and whilst giving her a
contented spirit, had also blessed her with a capacity for enjoying
any little happiness within her reach. A simple daisy-chain, a bunch
of buttercups, the first primrose, were like 'treasures of silver and
gold' to the poor lame girl.

Willie and Tom came next to Nelly. They were two merry little urchins
of six and eight years of age, and went regularly to school. Esther,
the "baby" of the family, was a rosy, laughing little girl of three,
always getting into mischief, but warm-hearted and affectionate.

Katie worked on steadily for some little time after her mother left
home that morning. Then she washed up the breakfast-things, and put
them away, and swept up the hearth. She had washed her hands, and was
about to sit down again to work, when the thought struck her that she
would just take one turn—just one—round the garden, that beautiful
spring morning. She should feel so fresh after it, and would be able to
work twice as fast when she came back.

So catching up little Esther in her arms, she ran with the child down
to the end of the garden. A clear running stream separated it from an
adjoining meadow, which was already quite yellow with cowslips.

"I must just gather a bunch for Nelly, she is so fond of them," thought
Katie, as she sprang across the little brook.

Once in the meadow, she and Esther were soon busy filling their
pinafores with sweet cowslips. The time slipped away unheeded.

"I will just make Nelly 'one' cowslip ball," thought Katie. And sitting
down on the root of an old tree under the hedge in the meadow, she took
out of her pocket the reel of cotton with which she had been working,
and began to make a cowslip ball.

This is a rather tedious thing to do—the first one she attempted she
spoiled, it was not a nice shape. Then she had not quite enough flowers
for the second, so she left Esther sitting on the old tree, whilst she
ran to gather some more. She was more successful in her next attempt,
but it had taken her a long time, and she had scarcely finished it,
when she heard the voices of her little brothers who had come home from
school, and were calling for her.

"Dear me, how late it must be!" cried Katie, as she hastened back
through the meadow.

When she reached the stream, Willie and Tom were both standing on the
opposite bank in the garden.

"Why, Katie, where have you been?" said they. "Nelly says we are to
take Ben his dinner, but it is not warmed yet, and it is time we went."

"Oh dear, dear, how tiresome!" said Katie. "I'm sure I never thought I
had been so long."

When she reached the cottage, it was nearly half-past twelve o'clock.
Poor Ben's dinner had to be sent, cold as it was, and then Katie had
to hurry and see about peeling the potatoes for their own meal. Little
Esther had wetted her feet sadly coming back in such a hurry across the
brook, so her socks and shoes had to be dried, and by the time that was
done, it was dinner-time.

Katie was cross with herself and with everybody. Nelly had thanked
her heartily for the cowslip ball, but had told her that she would
willingly have gone without the flowers, sooner than Katie should be
behindhand with the shirt she had promised her mother to get finished.

"I shall have plenty of time this afternoon, Nelly," said Katie,
pettishly; "so you need not trouble yourself about me."

By the time the dinner-things were cleared away, and her little
brothers sent off to school, it was past two o'clock. Katie sighed as
she washed her hands and again prepared to sit down to work.

"Everything seems to go wrong with me to-day," said she; "why, where
can my cotton be? I'm sure I had it in my pocket this morning."

"Katie had cotton in a field," lisped little Esther.

"Oh, what shall I do?" cried Katie, bursting into tears. "There's the
cotton lost now; it's all those tiresome cowslips. I'm sure I wish—"

Katie was quite wrong. It was not the cowslips that were in fault;
"all" the day's misfortunes—the wasted morning—Ben's cold dinner—the
lost cotton—all arose from the simple fact of Katie's yielding to the
first temptation to idleness. There was no harm whatever in her taking
a walk in the garden, or gathering cowslips at the proper time. Had she
sat steadily to her work in the morning, she would have finished it
early in the afternoon, and might have enjoyed herself in the meadow as
well. But, as her mother said to her, "duty first, pleasure afterwards."

Katie had a duty to perform; she had promised to do it, and she was now
suffering the penalty which all must pay, sooner or later, when they
leave "undone those things which they ought to have done."

"Leave Esther with me, Katie," said Nelly, "and go and look for the
cotton in the meadow; don't you recollect where you sat down?"

"Yes, I know the place exactly, but I am afraid I lost the cotton when
I ran so fast on hearing Willie calling to me. I know it was in my lap
the minute before."

Katie hastened into the field, and went first of all to the old tree
under the hedge. There was no cotton to be found. She then began to
search for it amongst the grass, but it was so thick and tall that
there was little chance of so small a thing as a reel of cotton being
recovered when once lost in it. At length, after nearly an hour's
ineffectual search, she returned to the cottage.

What should she do? The lost reel of cotton was the only one her mother
possessed. Mrs. Gordon had sent several reels of cotton with the
shirts, as she was most particular as to the cotton that was used; and
Katie had heard her mother say she hoped there would be sufficient to
finish the set, as she could not get any more like it in the village.
Katie hunted in her mother's work-bag, but there were only two balls of
very coarse common cotton, such as she could not possibly use for the
fine linen shirt.

"What shall I do? What shall I do?" she cried, as, sitting down on a
stool, she hid her face in her pinafore and sobbed bitterly.

"Perhaps Mrs. Graham, at the rectory, has some cotton like it, Katie
dear," said Nelly, "and I am sure she will give you some if you ask
her, she is so very kind."

"But what will mother say, Nelly?"

Her sister did not tell Katie she should have thought of that in the
morning, and it would have saved her much sorrow. But Katie's own
conscience told her as much, and even more. And when right-thinking
little Nelly suggested that the fear of what mother would say ought not
to keep Katie from doing all she could to make up for the evil, she
took her sister's advice, and prepared to go at once to the rectory,
and confess all to her mother.

It was already four o'clock when Katie set out on her journey. The
rectory was quite a mile distant, and as she walked along through the
quiet, peaceful meadows, she had ample time for reflection. She felt
vexed with herself, and formed many hasty resolutions for the future.
It is to be feared, however, that the thoughts of her mother's anger
affected her far more than any real sorrow for her disobedience.

Mrs. Lawrence was quite alarmed when she saw Katie, fearing that some
accident had befallen one of the younger children. And grieved as she
naturally felt at her daughter's conduct, it was a relief to her to
find that nothing more serious was the matter.

Katie told the whole truth to her mother, and did not attempt to spare
herself in any way. And Mrs. Lawrence went at once to Mrs. Graham, to
see if she could lend her some cotton. Mrs. Graham willingly gave her
a reel, and having heard of Katie's trouble, she sent for her into the
drawing-room, and spoke kindly to her on the necessity of making an
effort to conquer her present bad habits.

"You must pray to God, my dear child, to give you strength to resist
temptation; of your own self you can do nothing, and I fear you have
relied too much on your own strength, and have forgotten that text 'Let
him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.'"

"Indeed, ma'am, I did really mean to finish the shirt," said Katie,
with tears in her eyes.

"Very likely," said Mrs. Graham, "but that very fact should, in itself,
be a lesson to you for the future."

Katie thanked Mrs. Graham for her kindness, and promised to follow her
advice. She hastened home with the cotton, to do all she could to make
up for lost time. But, as an old writer says, "you may run all day
after a lost hour, but you will never be able to catch it."

It was but very little work she could do before her mother returned. Of
course the shirt was not finished, and Katie had the pain of seeing her
mother, fatigued as she was after her hard day's work, obliged to sit
up until very late, to make up for her daughter's idleness and neglect.

"Oh, mother, mother!" cried Katie, as Mrs. Lawrence, pale and weary,
passed through her daughter's room at a late hour, on her way to bed.
"Oh, mother, mother, I will never behave so again. I have prayed to God
to help me to do better for the future."

"God bless you, dear Katie," said her kind mother, "and give you
strength to keep your resolution."



CHAPTER II

The Happiness of Hazelbrook

ABOUT two miles from the village of Hazelbrook by the road, but a
much shorter distance across the fields, stood a fine old mansion,
surrounded by an extensive park. The deer bounded across the
greensward, or grazed peacefully beneath the shade of stately elms, and
a populous colony of rooks cawed noisily from the summit of the tall
dark fir trees at the back of the house.

Hazelbrook Hollow, as it was called, was a very ancient place. And
report said that the old hall, and part of one wing of the building,
dated so far back as the time of William the Conqueror. A fine avenue
of elms led to the house, from the garden front of which grassy
terraces extended, one below the other, to a clear, bright sheet of
water. This miniature lake was bounded on one side by a beautiful
grassy walk, hedged in by gigantic rhododendrons, which in the early
summer presented a splendid show of bright blossoms.

On the opposite side of the lake, a thick yew hedge was cut at
intervals into various quaint devices, and in an open glade stood a
gray, moss-grown sun-dial. Several fine swans sailed majestically on
the water, forming a scene of quiet and peaceful beauty for which the
"stately homes of England" are so remarkable.

Sir Herbert Tracy, the owner of Hazelbrook Hollow, was still in the
prime of life. He had lived a great deal abroad on account of his
wife's delicate health, which obliged her to winter in a warm climate.
But of late, she had become so much stronger that she had already
passed one winter at Hazelbrook, and had felt no ill effects from it.
Sir Herbert and Lady Tracy had had several children, but they all died
in their infancy, with the exception of a son and daughter. Young
Herbert Tracy was in his eighteenth year, and was finishing his studies
at Cambridge. His sister Mabel was younger. It was a source of great
happiness to Sir Herbert and his wife to feel that they might be able
to live at Hazelbrook.

They were most anxious that both Herbert and Mabel should early learn
to care for their poorer neighbours.

Herbert Tracy was a son of whom any parent might feel proud, and
little fairy-like, gentle Mabel was, as old Granny Hale called her,
"the happiness of Hazelbrook." Not a cottage for miles round but was
gladdened by a visit from Mabel, especially when the shadow of sickness
or sorrow had fallen.

It is easy for rich people to give a sum of money, but they are not
always so liberal of their time; and it is most true that, in many
instances, an hour's reading to a blind woman, or a half-hour's
soothing talk with some troubled spirit, is far more valued than a
gift of money would be. Mabel always made a point of spending an hour
on Sunday afternoon with Nelly Lawrence, and these visits were the
brightest spots in Nelly's life, and looked forward to with delight.

It was Easter Sunday—a bright and beautiful morning, not a breath of
wind was stirring nor a cloud flitting across the deep blue sky. The
birds were singing gaily, the bees were humming in the sunshine, and
the air was filled with a sweet scent of spring flowers. As Mabel Tracy
walked across the fragrant meadows leading from Hazelbrook Hollow to
Mrs. Lawrence's cottage, her young heart glowed with love and gratitude
to the Almighty Creator of this beautiful world, who had given her so
much to enjoy.

A bright flush of pleasure flitted across Nelly's face as Mabel entered
the cottage.

"Good morning, Nelly; how are you to-day?"

"Much the same, thank you, Miss Mabel, but so glad to see you. Mother
said she thought you would not come until the afternoon to-day, and so
I did not expect you so early."

"I came as soon as I could, Nelly, for I thought I should like to bring
you a spring nosegay this fine Easter morning." And as Mabel spoke, she
put a bunch of delicate spring flowers into Nelly's hands.

"Oh, thank you, thank you," said the child, her eyes sparkling with
pleasure.

"They are very beautiful, are they not, Nelly? And dear mamma has made
me think them more so than ever this morning, by showing me what a good
lesson spring flowers may teach us if we think rightly about them."

Nelly looked puzzled, as if she did not quite understand what Mabel
meant.

"Mamma reminded me," continued Mabel, "that if I had looked in the
garden during the winter months, I should have sought in vain for these
sweet flowers; yet all the while the root was in the ground alive, and
the leaves and blossoms were ready to burst out from it as soon as ever
the warm weather came. Just so our bodies, when lying in the grave, are
like flowers in winter; they are hidden, and are apparently dead, but
at the resurrection, they will rise again into new life.

"And then again, Nelly, you know all plants come first from seeds, and
the seed when put into the ground dies, and from its death come the
plant and flower; but the flower is far more beautiful than the seed;
and thus at the resurrection our glorified bodies will be far more
beautiful than our present ones."

"And there will be no sickness then," said Nelly, sighing.

"No, Nelly, our bodies then will be free from all sickness and death.
They will dwell in a land where 'there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain.'"

"Is it very wrong, Miss Mabel, to feel a little discontented sometimes?
I have never before thought of what you have told me to-day, but I will
try to do so when I feel lonely and dull. I so often wish I could help
mother; it is that which makes me murmur at being so long ill. I seem
as if I shouldn't so much mind for myself, but when I see mother with
so much more to do than she has strength to get through, I cannot help
wishing that God would make me strong and well."

"I do not wonder at your feeling so, dear Nelly, and yet you should
pray for strength to strive against such feelings. Dear papa was
reading to me in a book yesterday, that 'every moment brings its
mercies,' and that mercies ought therefore to bring content. You have
many mercies, Nelly, if you only set yourself to look for them. Think
what a blessing it is to have so good a mother as you have; and how
many poor children there are who have not so many home comforts as you
possess!

"Our gardener was telling mamma, yesterday, of a poor little gipsy
child who died of some fever out on the heath beyond the forest, and
who had no other shelter than a poor tent, and no bed but some straw on
the damp ground. Another great blessing, which you would value more if
you had been abroad as much as I have, is the being born and living in
dear happy England. Many years ago, my dear mamma gave me a beautiful
hymn to learn, and I have never forgotten it."

"Can you say it now, Miss Mabel?"

"I think I can, Nelly; at all events, I will try."

Mabel then repeated the favourite hymn, beginning—

   "I thank the goodness and the grace
      Which on my birth have smiled,
    And made me, in these Christian days,
      A happy English child."

"I like that hymn very much," said Nelly. "When you were abroad, Miss
Mabel, did you ever go to those countries where people bow down to
blocks of wood and stone?"

"No, Nelly, those countries are a great way off; but I have been in
countries much nearer home, where people profess to worship the true
God, and yet pray to pictures and images of saints, as they call them,
to intercede for them with God. And you know, Nelly dear, there is only
one way of getting to God, and that is—"

"Through Jesus Christ, our Lord," whispered Nelly.

"Right, Nelly. 'No man cometh unto the Father, but by "Me"'—these
are our Saviour's own words. And yet, in Roman Catholic countries,
people pray to the Virgin Mary, and to others who were weak and sinful
human beings like the rest of mankind, and who needed God's grace and
Christ's blood to save their souls."

"Please go on, Miss Mabel."

"Our peaceful, happy English Sabbaths, Nelly, how often have I longed
for them! And have thought that if I could but hear our village church
bell ringing, it would be to me like sounds of music. In France, Sunday
is like a noisy fair day; the people go to mass in the morning, and
then spend the rest of the day in amusements of all kinds. It was
impossible even to go from the house where we lived to the English
place of worship without passing through scenes which made one shudder.
Music, singing, dancing, shows of all kinds; and all on that day which
God has commanded us to remember and keep holy. Oh we have very, very
much to be thankful for," continued Mabel; "let us be grateful for the
present, and trust in God for the future.

"I must go now, Nelly; when I come again, I will try and tell you a
beautiful story which papa gave me to read the other day."



CHAPTER III

Going to the Fair

KATIE LAWRENCE was much steadier for some time after the day on which
she lost the reel of cotton, and her mother began to hope that she had
really turned over a new leaf. Mrs. Lawrence had a great deal of plain
sewing to do, and found Katie a real help to her.

One morning, however, she received a message which obliged her to go
directly to Hazelbrook Hollow, to take an order for some needlework
from a lady who was staying there on a visit. She left Katie some work
to do in her absence, and the day being hot and sultry, she told her
she might sit in a little arbour in the garden if she preferred it.

This arbour had been made by Ben, who was very proud, and not without
cause, of his work. It was formed of thin ash branches, bent over to
form an arch, and was covered with gay scarlet runners, now in full
bloom. Katie delighted in this bower, and was glad at her mother's
permission to work there.

Nelly had occasionally been able to recline on some pillows in the
arbour, but for some days past, the invalid child had been suffering
more pain than usual, and could not leave her little couch by the
cottage window. So Katie sat alone, with little Esther on the ground
at her feet, playing with some daisies. A hedge, which separated Mrs.
Lawrence's garden from that of her next-door neighbour, formed the back
of the arbour; and Katie had not been working long, when she heard a
voice whispering to her through the hedge, which was very thick during
the summer.

"Katie, Katie," said the voice, "are you alone?"

"There's only little Esther with me, Fanny; what do you want? Why don't
you come round into our garden?"

"Hush! Don't speak so loud. I came on this side of the hedge so that no
one should see me. Is your mother at home?"

"No."

"That's right; Bessie Thompson, and Lucy and I, and three or four more,
are going over to Oakfield to see the fair, and we want you to come
with us."

"I can't, Fanny; mother's not at home, and—"

"That's the very reason you can," said Fanny; "she need know nothing
at all about it. We shan't be gone more than two or three hours at
the most; and oh, Katie! There are such fine shows, and a real live
elephant, and I do not know what beside."

"But I know mother would not like me to go to a fair," answered Katie;
"you know how particular she is."

"Yes, I'm glad she is not my mother," said Fanny, in a rude tone.

"She's a very good mother, though," replied Katie, colouring, for she
could not bear to hear Fanny speak thus.

"I've no doubt of it," said Fanny, sneeringly, "and you are a wonderful
pattern daughter, to be sure; I'm sorry I took the trouble to come
round here, that's all: only I thought you were really old enough to
see a little of the world, unless you mean to be tied for ever to your
mother's apron string."

Katie was like many older and wiser than herself; she was more afraid
of the ridicule of the world than of displeasing God and disobeying her
mother. She hesitated. The temptation to go was very strong. She ought
at once to have refused. But she listened to the tempter.

Fanny saw the advantage she had gained, and continued,—

"I know if I were in your place, Katie, I should feel quite ashamed to
be so little my own mistress as you are. And as to there being any harm
in going to Oakfield, I should like to know what there can be wrong in
going for a walk across the fields."

"It isn't that, Fanny; it is the fair," said Katie.

"Well, just as you please," said Fanny, making a movement as if she
were going away. "I only meant to give you a little pleasure; you have
little enough, I'm sure."

"Stop, Fanny, don't go just yet; I do not think we shall be home in
three hours!"

"Quite certain we shall. We can get there easily across the fields in
three-quarters of an hour, and reckoning the same time for coming back,
that will leave us an hour and a half to see the fair. When do you
expect your mother?"

"Not till the evening. Whenever she goes to Hazelbrook Hollow, she
always has her dinner there."

"That's well; then I'll go and tell the others you are coming, and you
can meet us at the cross-road, by the bridge. You'll be sure and come?"

"I'll come, never fear," said Katie. And with an uneasy feeling on her
mind, she folded up her work and prepared to leave the arbour.

The next moment she heard Fanny's step returning.

"Oh, Katie, I forgot, if you have any money, bring it with you, because
you will have to pay to see the shows."

"I have only one shilling in the world, Fanny."

"That will be better than nothing; be sure and bring it."

Mrs. Lawrence was in the habit of giving Katie a few pence for every
piece of work she finished, and this shilling Katie had saved up
towards buying herself a warm shawl against the winter. She kept her
money under a little china teacup on the mantelpiece in the cottage.
And as Nelly's couch was close to it, Katie pondered how she should
contrive to get the shilling without her sister's knowledge. For Katie
dared not tell Nelly what she was about to do, knowing well that she
would be of her mother's opinion, and would advise Katie by all means
not to go to Oakfield.

It is a bad sign when we are ashamed that a fellow-creature should see
and know our actions, and yet not be ashamed of performing them in the
sight of a just and holy God. There was Esther, likewise—what should
she do with her? She would ask their next-door neighbour to look after
her, so that was soon settled. But how to get the money was not so
easy. If young people would only consider that the first downward step
from the plain path of duty is sure to involve them in a maze of deceit
and lies, that to hide "one" fault they will have, in nine cases out
of ten, to commit many more, surely they would pause before they do a
wrong act.

Katie took little Esther in her arms, and went into their neighbour's
cottage.

"Mrs. Morton, will you look after Esther a bit for me? I have to go
into the village, and mother is out, and Nelly is not so well to-day
and cannot take charge of her."

"I'm busy washing, Katie, and can't promise to see much to her; but you
can leave her here a bit, if you like. I suppose you will not be long.
I saw one of those Price girls—I think it was Fanny—run down my garden
a short time since; I wish I'd caught her, that's all. I should like
to know what business she had here. I hope you have nothing to do with
her, Katie; if I had girls of my own, I'd rather they never spoke to a
creature than have such a companion as Fanny Price."

Katie felt very uncomfortable, and was in a great hurry to get away;
but Mrs. Morton still went on: she was a great talker when once she
began.

"I know your mother thinks as I do about Fanny, and indeed most of
the village girls. They are a bad set, Katie, and you will learn
no good from them, mark my words. My good man told me this morning
that he heard they were all agoing over to Oakfield to the fair this
afternoon—a nice place for young girls, certainly. Well, you may be
thankful, Katie, that you have such a mother as you have; you'll know
her value some day, my girl. Be back as soon as you can, Katie, for I
can't promise to look much after Esther."

Katie began to wish she had not promised to join the girls. But she
silenced her conscience by saying that it was too late now to draw
back, so she hurried towards her mother's cottage, fearing lest she
should be keeping Fanny waiting, and that some of them would be coming
after her.

"How hot you look, Katie?" said Nelly. "Have you been running?"

"Only a little with Esther, Nelly." And as she spoke, she went towards
the mantelshelf, and appeared as if looking for something very intently.

"I cannot find any needles," said she, "and I have just broken mine. I
think mother must have taken her case with her; but I know there were
scarcely any in it, so I shall go down to the shop and buy a paper. I
heard mother say she should want some soon."

And Katie lifted up the little teacup, and took her shilling from under
it.

"What will you do with Esther, Katie?" asked Nelly.

"Oh, she's in at Mrs. Morton's," answered Katie, as, putting on her
bonnet and cape, she hurried away, fearful lest Nelly should ask any
more questions.

Katie hastened along to the place of meeting. Fanny and her companions
were there, and were quite angry with Katie for having kept them
waiting so long.

"We might have been halfway to Oakfield by this time," said Fanny.

Oakfield was about two miles from Hazelbrook, and the way lay through
fields of rich grass. In some, the mowers were already at work, and
the sweet fragrance of the new-mown grass was borne along on the soft
summer breeze. At another time, Katie would have delighted in such a
scene, for she had a true taste for the beauties of nature; but now
everything seemed changed. The sight which she had so often before
admired, now seemed to have no charm for her. Her one thought, her one
object, was to get to Oakfield and back, without her mother knowing
where she had been.

Poor short-sighted Katie! She forgot that one all-seeing Eye is ever
about our paths, and "spieth out all our ways." Her companions laughed
at her for her "low spirits," as they called it, and Bessie Thompson
asked her if she expected to meet her mother at the fair.

Over and over again did Katie wish herself at home, and yet a false
feeling of shame, and a dread of being laughed at, prevented her from
following her conscience, which even then was striving within her. So
at last, they reached Oakfield, and amid the novelty of all she saw
there, Katie, for a time, forgot all her fears.

When they came to the show in which the elephant was exhibited, Fanny
Price said to Katie,—

"Did you bring your money with you?"

"Yes, here it is," answered Katie, showing her the shilling.

"Give it to me, then; there are just six of us, and the shilling will
pay for us all; I can pay you again by-and-by."

Katie gave Fanny the shilling, and the girls entered the show.

Katie was pleased to see the elephant and the other animals, but
thought they looked very miserable, cooped up in their close, small
cages. They looked quite different in the gay pictures outside the
show; and like many other people, Katie felt sorry she had thus thrown
away her money. Fanny, too, never said a word about repaying her, but
only asked her if she had no more money; and when she found that she
had not, she and her companions paid very little more attention to her.

Katie was two or three years younger than Fanny and her friends, and
looked younger than she really was, owing to the simple neatness of her
dress; whilst Fanny and the other girls were attired in a good deal of
tawdry finery, and looked like anything but respectable village lasses.

After they had seen the show, they loitered about the fair, looking at
all the stalls. Bessie Thompson met an acquaintance, a young man whose
father kept the alehouse at Hazelbrook. Katie knew him to be anything
but a steady young man; she had often heard her mother speak about him.
He had a drinking and dancing tent at the fair, and asked Bessie and
her party to come in, saying he would treat them, and that they should
have a good dance afterwards.

There was a band of music playing in the tent, and people were sitting
drinking and smoking at one end. Katie shrank back with horror;
everybody had such a coarse, bold look, so different from anything
she had ever seen before. And her own knowledge of right and wrong,
and the modest way in which she had been brought up, at once warned
her not to accept the invitation. She was already beginning heartily
to repent having come to Oakfield. Her head ached with all the noise
and excitement; and she felt the truth of the saying that unlawful
pleasures can never bring true happiness. She fancied she had more
influence with Fanny than with the rest, and hastily drew her on one
side.

"Dear Fanny, don't go in there; pray, pray don't; I am sure it is not
a fit place. Let us go home at once; it must be time to do so, or we
shall be very late back."

"What nonsense, Katie! As if I was going home now, when all the fun is
just about to begin."

"What does that child say?" asked Bessie Thompson.

"She wants to go home," said Fanny, in a mocking tone.

"Why did you bring her with you at all?" asked Dan Carter, the owner of
the tent.

Bessie whispered something to him in reply.

And although Katie could not hear all that was said, she caught the
words "money," and "pay for the show." She coloured up indignantly.
"This," then, was all they had asked her to join them for. Humbled
and mortified as she felt, she yet made one other attempt to persuade
Fanny, at all events, to return with her. But all her efforts were
useless.

And Dan Carter cut them short by saying, rudely,—

"The sooner you take yourself off, if you're not going to be sociable,
the better; your room is better than your company. You'll repent of
your folly, though, before you get halfway to Hazelbrook, or I'm vastly
mistaken in those clouds yonder."

Katie scarcely heard the end of the sentence, for no sooner did she
find that it was useless trying to persuade Fanny to come with her,
than she set off at a quick pace, fearful almost that, by delaying
another moment, she should lose the power of escape. Hot and agitated,
frightened at the scenes and noise everywhere around her, she threaded
her way through the din and uproar of the fair. She had never been in
such a crowd before, and people pushed her about in an unfeeling manner.

At last, she got out of the fair, and hastening along, sat down to rest
for a moment on the stile leading into the first meadow on the way to
Hazelbrook. Then the clouds of which Dan Carter had spoken first caught
her attention. They were very black and lowering, and the distant
thunder, which the noise of the fair had prevented her from hearing
before, was distinctly heard now in the stillness of the meadow. Katie
hastened on, hoping that she might reach home before the storm burst.
She tried to pray to God to bring her safe to her mother's cottage—oh
that she had never left it!—but her thoughts were too confused, and her
brain whirled with feverish excitement.

She had reached the third field, about halfway to her home, when a
bright flash of lightning, followed by a crackling peal of thunder,
caused her to utter a scream. She had never felt afraid of a storm
before. Hitherto she had been taught to feel that the God of the
thunder is able and willing to protect His people; but now she almost
looked upon the storm as a judgment sent to punish her for her
disobedience, and scarcely knowing what she did, she ran to shelter
herself beneath some large trees in the meadow.

Had Katie thought for a moment, she would not have done so, for her
mother had always cautioned her never, on any account, to take refuge
under trees in a thunder-storm. Many persons have lost their lives from
doing so; for trees are great conductors of lightning, and attract
the electric fluid. But Katie thought of nothing. And as the thunder
pealed, and the vivid lightning flashed, and the rain descended in
perfect sheets of water, she leaned against the trunk of one of the
trees to keep herself from falling.

Then a more vivid flash than any before lighted up the sky with a lurid
glare. A peal of thunder followed, which seemed to rend the very air;
and one of the fine spreading elms near that beneath which Katie was
standing was riven from top to bottom. Katie heard and saw no more; she
had fallen senseless on the ground.


The fury of the storm had spent itself; and the mowers, who had taken
shelter in a barn not far off, were passing through the meadow on their
way to the village.

"That's a fine tree that's been struck yonder," said one; "but surely
there's some one lying under that other tree hard by."

"No one can be alive there after such a storm," exclaimed another of
the men.

And they all hastened across the meadow to the tree under which Katie
was lying.

She was stretched with her face downwards on the ground, and lay quite
motionless.

"Dead, quite dead!" said the mower who had first spoken, as he brushed
his rough hand across his face, for he had young ones of his own at
home.

They lifted her up very tenderly, those rough, rude men.

"Why, it's Widow Lawrence's daughter!" they cried, as they began to
carry her to her mother's cottage.

Half an hour afterwards, Katie was lying on her own little bed at home,
and the doctor was using all his efforts to restore animation—with what
success will be told in the next chapter.



CHAPTER IV

The Shadow of Death

ALL through the long hours of the night, a light shone in Widow
Lawrence's cottage window, telling of sad and anxious watching. And all
night long did Katie's life seem to hang upon so frail a thread that
every moment those around her expected it would snap asunder.

With great difficulty, the doctor at last restored her to
consciousness; but Katie's whole system had received so severe a shock
that he deemed it best to prepare Mrs. Lawrence for the worst, and to
express his doubts whether she would survive the night. He stayed with
her several hours, and then left full instructions with her mother,
impressing on her the necessity of keeping Katie as quiet as possible,
and avoiding the least excitement, which, in her weak state, could
scarcely prove otherwise than fatal.

Mrs. Lawrence had most fortunately returned home nearly an hour before
the mowers brought in poor Katie, so no time was lost, and the doctor
had been sent for at once. No one seemed to be able to give any
information as to how Katie came to be caught in the storm; and the one
all-absorbing fear for her child's life had diverted Mrs. Lawrence's
thoughts from the subject.

All through the lonely night the anxious, weary mother sat watching her
suffering child, and most fervently did she pray that God in His mercy
would spare her young life, and give her time and grace to repent. For
with her previous knowledge of Katie's character, she did not doubt but
that the sad accident which had befallen her was the result of some
fresh act of disobedience on her part.

Towards morning, the mother's prayer seemed answered, for Katie fell
into a gentle sleep; her features lost that look of wild excitement,
and a calm, peaceful expression took its place.

Tears of gratitude flowed down Mrs. Lawrence's pale cheeks, and seemed
a relief to her anxious mind. She arose from her seat by the bedside,
and walking to the window, she opened it. The sweet fresh morning air
seemed to revive her. Day was just breaking, and the sky was tinged all
over with a soft rosy hue.

As she stood gazing on the still and peaceful scene before her, she
heard the garden gate open, and a minute afterwards there was a gentle
tap at the cottage door. The window of Katie's room was at the side of
the house, so that Mrs. Lawrence could not see any one as they came
through the garden. She glanced at the bed; Katie was still calmly
sleeping. And opening the door as noiselessly as possible, she went
down the stairs, thinking that perhaps the doctor had sent to inquire
after his patient.

On opening the door, she quite started back on seeing Fanny Price;
her hair dishevelled, her dress in disorder, and her eyes swollen
with crying. Fanny was no favourite of Mrs. Lawrence's, but she was a
kind-hearted woman, and was touched by the girl's evident distress.

"What is the matter, Fanny? What ails you?"

"Oh, Mrs. Lawrence! Is she dead? Pray, pray tell me."

"Of whom are you speaking?"

"Of Katie; oh, tell me, is she dead?"

"She is not dead," said Mrs. Lawrence; "but—"

"Thank God for it! Oh, thank God!" And Fanny sank down upon the
door-stop, and burst into a fit of weeping.

"What can you mean, Fanny?" asked Mrs. Lawrence, whose suspicions began
to be aroused. "Was it you who—"

"Yes, yes!" cried the girl, passionately. "It was all my fault, Mrs.
Lawrence; Katie would not have gone to the fair if I had not persuaded
her. If she had died, it would have been I who killed her. We did not
come home until late last night, for the storm kept us at Oakfield, and
then father told me that the mowers had found Katie Lawrence dead in
the fields. And oh, Mrs. Lawrence, I prayed as I never prayed before,
that it might not be so; and sinful, wicked as I am, God has heard me."

"Katie is still very, very ill, Fanny; and I must not leave her any
longer. I am thankful, for your own sake as well as mine, that God has
spared my poor child's life. May it be a lesson to you which you will
never forget; a warning how far you entice others into bad ways."

Fanny Price was turning away, for the widow's voice was almost stern
in her sorrow, and the girl's eyes fell beneath the expression of the
mother's face.

"Stop, Fanny," said Mrs. Lawrence, in a kinder and gentler tone, for
the thought had entered her mind that it ill became her, whose child's
life had just been so mercifully spared, to bear malice, and to lose
the opportunity of exerting a good influence over Fanny's future
conduct.

"Stop, Fanny, let us part friends. I forgive you from my heart, and may
God give you strength and grace to profit by the sad lesson you have
received. If I can advise you at any time, come to me; that's all."

Fanny's tears flowed afresh, but they were tears of gratitude.

"May I come again and ask after Katie?"

"Come whenever you like."

"Thank you again and again," said the girl, as, drawing her shawl over
her head, she left the cottage.

Mrs. Lawrence gently closed the door, and went up to Katie's room.
Nelly, who had been removed into her mother's room, in order that Katie
should be by herself, had not closed her eyes the whole of that sad
night.

"Mother, mother," whispered she.

Mrs. Lawrence bent down to kiss the little excited face that was
uplifted to hers.

"Is Katie better?"

"I think so, my darling."

"Will she die, mother?"

"I pray—I hope not, Nelly."

"How good God is, mother!"

"Yes, dear child; let us pray that we may love Him as we ought, with
all our heart, and mind, and soul, and strength."

When Mrs. Lawrence entered Katie's room, she found her child still
sleeping; so she went downstairs again to call Ben, who slept with Tom
and Willie in a little room on the ground-floor of the cottage. Poor
Ben had been hard at work ploughing all the previous day, and slept
soundly. It was not that he did not share in the general anxiety about
Katie, for he was a good, affectionate boy, and loved his mother and
sisters dearly.

"It's time to get up, Ben; it's nearly five o'clock."

"How's Katie, mother?" said he, rubbing his eyes.

"Better, Ben, thank God. Fanny Price has just been here; it was she
that persuaded Katie to go with her to the fair yesterday."

"Dan Carter asked me to go over there too, mother, when I had done my
work, but I didn't fancy going, somehow. And I had some work to do in
the garden."

"You're a good lad, Ben," said his mother.

"It was Mr. Graham who warned all us boys about the fair last Sunday
morning at the school," said Ben, honestly; "perhaps I should have gone
if it had not been for that."

"May you always be able to act upon good advice, Ben."

And Mrs. Lawrence returned upstairs to her charge.

Katie was partially awake when her mother entered the room and was
moaning sadly, as if in pain.

As her mother approached the bed, she opened her eyes, and gazed wildly
round the room.

"Where am I? Where am I? Is the storm over? Oh, mother, mother!"

And meeting her mother's eyes lovingly fixed upon her, Katie's thoughts
returned, and the warm tears rolled down her cheeks.

"Oh, mother!" she said, in a weak and broken voice. "I have behaved so
ill! You don't know all; if you did, you never would forgive me. I know
I am very ill—do you think I shall die, mother?" And the old look of
terror returned.

"Hush, Katie darling! The doctor says you must be very, very quiet,
and not excite yourself. I know 'all,' Katie—everything, and I have
forgiven you long since."

"Dear, dear mother! But will God forgive me? It was a judgment upon
me yesterday; I am sure it was; and I feel as if I could never be
forgiven."

"You need not feel so, Katie dear. You know our blessed Saviour forgave
all who truly repented and came to Him—even His disciple, Peter, when
he had denied Him. It is for Jesus Christ's sake that God will forgive
you, and change your heart by His Holy Spirit.

   "'Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in My name, He will give you,'
are Jesus' own words.

"And He promised that the Father would give His Holy Spirit to all them
that ask Him. But you must not talk any more now, Katie; shut your
eyes, and try to sleep again."

"Sing me that hymn, mother."

The tears tame into Mrs. Lawrence's eyes as she complied with Katie's
request. She knew well what hymn her child meant. She had been used to
sing it to her when quite a little girl, but latterly Katie had not
cared much about such things. And the mother's tears were tears of joy
as she heard Katie asking for the favourite hymn of her childhood.

Mrs. Lawrence sat by the bedside, holding Katie's hand, and singing in
a low voice,—

   "'Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
     Let me hide myself in Thee
     Let the water and the blood,
     From Thy riven side which flowed,
     Be of sin the double cure,—
     Cleanse me from its guilt and power.'"

Before the hymn was finished, Katie had again fallen into a calm and
peaceful slumber.


When the doctor came that morning, he told Mrs. Lawrence that all
immediate danger was over, and that, with perfect quiet and rest, her
daughter would now soon come round again. How thankful Mrs. Lawrence
was to hear such good news!

Fanny Price came again in the course of the day to inquire after Katie.

And Mrs. Lawrence spoke kindly to her, advising her to get a situation,
and try to become an industrious girl.

"You ought to be earning your own living, and helping your parents,
Fanny: you are nearly sixteen, are you not?"

"I was sixteen last week."

"Take my advice, then, and get into service as soon as you can."

Fanny blushed deeply as she replied,—

"We girls have got a bad name in the village, Mrs. Lawrence: I fear no
one would take me. A friend of Mrs. Graham's was asking the other day
for a girl to help in the nursery, and mother went to the rectory about
me, but Mrs. Graham said she could not recommend me to her friend."

"See what it is, Fanny, to lose your good name. Solomon says, 'A good
name is rather to be chosen than great riches.'"

"I didn't seem to care at all about it till last night," said Fanny.
"And now I do care, it's no use," added she, in a doleful tone.

"Don't say that, Fanny; it is of great use to care; and the very fact
of your caring shows that God has softened your heart by the events of
last evening. It is never too late to do better."

"It seems harder than ever now to do right, Mrs. Lawrence."

"Ask God for strength, then, to begin at once, and I am sure Mrs.
Graham will be one of the first to encourage you to persevere, when she
sees you making an effort to do better."

"Oh, Mrs. Lawrence, how kind you are!" said Fanny, with tears in her
eyes. "I said yesterday I was glad you were not my mother, but now I
feel so differently: no one talks to me at home as you do."

"That may be, Fanny; but you might learn far more than I could teach
you if you were to attend the Sunday school, and go more regularly to a
place of worship."

"I don't like asking Mrs. Graham to let me go to school again, after
behaving so ill, and saying I would not go."

"That is false pride," said Mrs. Lawrence, "and you should not listen
to it."

"Would you mind asking Mrs. Graham for me?"

"I will do so willingly, Fanny, if you will make up your mind to attend
regularly."

"I will indeed, Mrs. Lawrence," said Fanny, and as she spoke, she
shivered violently.

"Did you get wet yesterday?" asked Mrs. Lawrence.

"No, we were in the tent in the fair, all the time of the storm; but I
have felt ill ever since. I don't know what is the matter with me."

"Go home now, and keep yourself quiet, Fanny, and don't come up here
again to-day. Ben shall call and tell you how Katie goes on, and I will
speak to Mrs. Graham when I see her to-morrow."

Mrs. Lawrence had spoken to Fanny at the door, not wishing to ask her
in, lest the sound of her voice might excite Katie.


It so happened that by the next evening Fanny Price, Bessie Thompson,
and Dan Carter were all taken seriously ill, and the doctor soon
pronounced it to be a most virulent kind of smallpox. Dan Carter
remembered hearing a tramp, who had been sitting all the afternoon
drinking in the tent, say that some of his folk had been very bad with
the smallpox.

But it had never struck him that there could be any fear of infection.
The heated, bad air of the tent, which became crowded to excess as
the storm came on, all added to the danger, and Fanny and her friends
happened to be most of the time quite close to the tramp and his wife,
who had persuaded the weak, foolish girls to allow her to tell them
their fortunes.

Dan's recollection of the tramp's words was his last act of
consciousness. From the first, the doctor gave but little hope of him.
He had led a very loose life, which was terribly against him. And in
less than a week from the day of the fair, the wretched young man was
hurried into his Maker's presence, without one moment for repentance,
for he had been in a high state of delirium from the time he was first
taken ill.

There was weeping, and mourning too, in other cottage houses in
Hazelbrook. Bessie Thompson also sank under the violence of the
disease, although she lived nearly a week longer than Dan Carter; and
God mercifully restored her to consciousness for the last two or three
days of her life. Those who witnessed her death-bed scene, never forgot
it to the latest moment of their lives. Mr. Graham prayed constantly
with her; and trembling, almost despairingly, the unhappy girl was
enabled to throw herself at the foot of the cross. We dare not say her
end was peace, or that her death presented other than a fearful warning
to all who are lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God.


For many days Fanny Price's life was despaired of. The anxiety she
had suffered about Katie all seemed to aggravate her illness, and for
nearly a week she was quite insensible, raving continually in a manner
which affected all who heard her.

After that time, however, she began to recover, although very, very
slowly. And we are happy to say she arose from her bed, which had been
so nearly one of death, an altered girl. She now listened meekly and
thankfully to the teachings of God's Holy Spirit, which she had before
so often rejected; and in humble faith, she begged forgiveness of her
former sins for Jesus Christ's sake, and prayed for strength to live a
new life for the future.



CHAPTER V

The Happy Island

ONE fine Sabbath afternoon about three weeks after the day of the
storm, Mabel Tracy, on entering Widow Lawrence's cottage, found Nelly
in her old place by the window, and Katie sitting in her mother's large
arm-chair. Mrs. Lawrence had gone to church, and taken little Esther
and her brothers with her; and Katie and Nelly were anxiously expecting
Miss Mabel's visit. Mabel had been several times to see Katie during
her illness, and had brought her each time some little dainty to tempt
her appetite.

"I am glad to see you downstairs again, Katie," said Mabel, in her
pleasant, cheerful voice, as she entered. "I am a little later than
usual to-day."

"We were so afraid you were not coming," said Nelly.

"I have been round to see poor old Granny Hale; she has kept her bed
since Thursday, and the doctor seems to think her very ill. I never
like to disappoint her, for it is not as if she could see to read. The
time must pass very lonely with her sometimes, and yet she generally
seems cheerful. Besides which, I was the bearer of very good news to
her."

"Mother told us this morning that Granny Hale's son was coming home
from across the sea," said Katie.

"Yes; that is what I was going to tell you. She has had a letter from
him to-day. It is many, many years since she heard of him before. Papa
says he was a sad wild lad, and ran away to sea, and nearly broke his
poor mother's heart. However, as she says, she still prayed for him, in
humble faith on His promise who had said, 'Ask, and it shall be given
you;' and firmly believed that in His own good time God would answer
her prayer. And He has done so."

"Do you think it is right to pray to God about trifles, Miss Mabel?"
asked Katie.

"Papa was talking to me on that very subject this morning," answered
Mabel: "he said we ought to learn to ask God's blessing on little
things as well as great; and that there is nothing which is right for
us to do, but it is also right to ask that God would bless it. For
there is nothing so little but the frown of God can change it into the
greatest calamity, or His smile raise it into a memorable mercy.

"There was once a very good man named Bishop Heber, and when his famous
poem, 'Palestine,' had gained the prize, and had been read before all
the learned men at Oxford, the assembly broke up. But the successful
scholar could nowhere be found, till at length some one discovered him
in his study, on his knees, thanking God who had given him the power to
write that poem, and who had spared his beloved parents to witness and
share his joy."

"Please, Miss Mabel, will you tell us that story you promised me a long
while ago?"

"I am glad you reminded me of it, Nelly, for I had quite forgotten it."

"I am glad you did forgot it," said Katie, "for now I shall be able to
hear it too."

Katie Lawrence was indeed greatly changed. Before her illness she
had never cared about being in the room when Mabel called to sea her
sister; indeed, she usually, if at home, found some excuse for being
absent. But it was quite different now; and the humble, teachable girl
was only too happy to listen to words of holy truth that fell from the
lips of gentle Mabel Tracy.

"I will try and tell it you as simply as I can," said Mabel, "in order
that you may understand it all. Papa read it to me out of a book."

"Once upon a time there were some people who lived in a happy island;
but they behaved very badly there, and the king of the island banished
them. The place to which they were exiled was a barren and cheerless
coast, and it lay within distant sight of their former happy home,
which they had lost by their misdeeds.

"Soon after they had been expelled from the island, a message had come
to them from their sovereign, offering a pardon to all that would seek
it. Strange to say, few minded it. They had grown quite hardened, and
they tried to persuade themselves that the mud huts in which they lived
were more comfortable than the mansions in the happy land, and that the
wild berries on the bleak shore of their new home were preferable to
all the fine fruits of the island garden.

"There was one man, however, who thought differently. He was a very
thoughtful person. Often and often you might have seen him pacing up
and down the beach, when the golden rays of the setting sun shone full
on the happy isle; and as from his own dreary prison, he saw the rich
forests and purple mountains of his former dwelling, he sighed, and
wished he was there.

"One morning, when he awoke, it struck him that the opposite shore
appeared unusually near, and the tide seemed so low that he fancied he
might easily swim across. And so he hastened forth; first over the dry
shingle, then over the solid sand, then still on, until he reached the
wet, soft strand, from whence the waves had but just receded. And then
he was astonished at his own delusion; for there was still a mighty
gulf before him, and even whilst he gazed, the tide was rising. Sad and
disheartened, he returned backwards towards the dreary shore.

"A short time afterwards, he tried another plan. To the right of
his dwelling the tall cliffs stretched far away in a succession of
headlands, until the one farthest off seemed to touch the opposite
side. To this distant spot he determined to make a visit, in the hope
that it would lead him to the long-sought land.

"The road was in many places very steep, and for a long time the
distant headland seemed no nearer than before. But at last, after much
fatigue and toil, he succeeded in reaching it. With eager steps he ran
along the ridge, half hoping that it was an isthmus, or neck of land,
which would bear him to the blessed isle.

"But, alas! no. He had reached the most distant edge, and there was
still the vast ocean dashing against the base of the cliff. Bitterly
disappointed, and faint and weary with his useless toil, he flung
himself on the ground and wept. But by-and-by, he noticed off the shore
a little boat, with whose appearance he was quite familiar. It used to
ride at anchor opposite his own abode, and had done so for a long time;
but, like his neighbours, he had got so used to seeing it, that he took
no notice of it.

"Now, however, seeing it there, he looked at it, and as he looked, it
came nearer to him. At last it came close to the rocks on which he was
seated. It was a beautiful little boat, with snow-white sail and golden
prow, and a bright red cross was its waving flag. There was one on
board—only one. His raiment was white and glistening, and his features
showed whence he came.

"'Son of man,' he said, in a kind and gentle voice, 'why weepest thou?'

"'Because I cannot reach the blessed isle.'

"'Canst thou trust thyself with me?'

"The poor wanderer looked at the frail little boat leaping lightly on
the waves, and he hesitated, till he looked again at the Pilot's kind
countenance, and then he said, 'I can.'

"And no sooner had he stepped on board, than swift as a sunbeam, the
boat bore him to the land of light. And with many a warm welcome from
the Pilot's friends, he found himself among its happy inhabitants,
clothed in the same bright raiment as they, and free to all their
privileges as a subject of their king.

"That is the whole of the story," said Mabel, as she concluded; "and
now can you tell me what it means?"

"Not quite," replied Katie; "I seem to know that there is some other
meaning to it, but I cannot quite explain it."

"Is it not something like a parable?" asked Nelly.

"You are right, Nelly," said Mabel; "it is called an allegory, which
means very much the same as a parable."

"And will you explain it to us, Miss Mabel?"

"I will give you dear papa's own words," said Mabel; "I did not
understand all of it myself until he explained it to me. The happy
isle is peace with God, and shows us the state in which man was while
innocent. The dreary, barren shore to which they were exiled is the
state of misery into which sinful man has fallen. The little boat
shows the 'only' way by which a sinner can pass over from his misery
into peace with God. It is not a way of any man's contriving, but is
provided for sinners by God Himself. That way is the 'atonement,' and
He who so kindly invites sinners to avail themselves of it is—"

"Our Saviour?" said Nelly.

"Just so, Nelly; and the poor man who tried to get to the happy island
his own way is like one who tries to make a righteousness for himself.
Papa says this is a mistake into which so many people fall. They
determine to read so many chapters, and to pray so long every day; they
determine henceforth never to be angry, or deceitful, or idle, and make
up their minds to go on in this way until they are really good, and
deserve to be forgiven.

"But how far must any one walk round the coast of Europe before he
arrives in Britain? He might walk on for ever, and would be no nearer,
because Britain is an island, and there is a great sea between it and
Europe. Just so the sinner cannot, of himself, reach God. Instead of
being good in order to be forgiven, we have need to be forgiven before
we can begin to become good."

Lady Tracy, who had promised to call for Mabel on her way home, now
entered the cottage. She had overheard the latter part of what her
daughter had been saying, and continued the subject by repeating the
verse of a hymn which both Katie and Nelly had learned:

   "Eternal life is not a gift which good deeds or prayers can deserve or
purchase; it is the free gift of God.

   "'God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in His Son.'"

Lady Tracy then spoke kindly to Katie, telling her how glad she was to
see her so much better.

"God has been most merciful to you, my dear child," said she. "Try to
feel grateful to Him for His goodness; and, above all, try and realise
that the 'only' way to have true peace with God is to have sincere,
humble trust in Jesus Christ."



CHAPTER VI

The Return of the Prodigal

IN a small lonely cottage, halfway between Hazelbrook and "The Hollow,"
lived old Granny Hale. She was not so very old; but her infirm health,
her blindness, and her solitary life in that lone cottage by the
woodside had caused the children of Hazelbrook to call her by the name
of "Granny." It was a sort of pet name, denoting the life of dependence
she lived on the assistance and kindness of others. Her husband died in
a decline, nearly twenty years before, at the early age of thirty-five.
His family inherited his delicacy of constitution; all except the
youngest boy, Tom, who was a strong, hearty lad, who never ailed
anything.

When Mrs. Hale lost her husband, and afterwards all her children, one
by one, except Tom, she seemed to cling to him with double affection.
To a certain extent, this was natural. But the excess of her love for
her only child led her to be blind to his faults, which were increased
by her own indulgence.

Tom Hale became a selfish, idle boy, allowing his mother to work early
and late to support herself and him. For he never stayed more than a
week or so in any place, preferring to idle away his time at home,
instead of earning his own living, and assisting his mother.

At last, Sir Herbert Tracy and Mr. Graham both spoke seriously to Mrs.
Hale on the subject, and pointed out to her the sin she was committing
in allowing Tom to continue in his present idle way of living. They
so far convinced her that she consented to their speaking to Tom,
and telling him that they would once more find him employment on a
neighbouring farm. But that if he did not do his duty and behave
industriously, he was to look for no further help from his mother,
whose health had been for some time giving way.

In a sulky humour, Tom went to his new situation. He did not try to
please his master, and at the first word of reproof which he received
for an act of gross negligence and idleness, he ran away to a seaport
town some miles off, and got taken as one of the boys on board a large
ship, bound for a distant part of the world. It was some time after his
departure before even this much was learned of what had become of him,
for the heartless boy had left without a word to his poor mother.

The loss of her son struck the final blow to Mrs. Hale's already
declining health, and a severe attack of fever, which for some time
threatened her life, left her totally blind. She arose from her bed of
sickness, a sadder but a wiser woman, confessing the folly and weakness
of which she had been guilty in her treatment of Tom.

She was no longer able to work for herself, and her friends advised her
to go into the workhouse. But the poor woman clung so fondly to her old
home, every corner of which was familiar to her, and into every room
of which she could soon grope her way by means of a stick, that Sir
Herbert, to whom the cottage belonged, consented to her staying in it
as long as she liked. A small allowance from the parish, a little help
from her brother, who was one of the gardeners at Hazelbrook Hollow,
and what money she could earn by knitting stockings, sufficed to bring
in enough for her simple wants. Little Mary Wood, her brother's child,
used to go every morning to light Granny's fire, and get her her
breakfast; and some of the Hazelbrook children were frequently dropping
in during the day to get her anything she might want.

Granny Hale was a great favourite with children. She was always
cheerful, notwithstanding her affliction, and there was scarcely a
child in Hazelbrook but would willingly give up an hour's play to
gather up sticks to boil Granny's kettle, or read a chapter to her out
of her large old family Bible. This Bible had many pictures in it, and
Mrs. Hale knew them so well that when any of her young readers came to
one of the pictures, she could explain it to them nearly as well as if
she had had the use of her eyes.

Ben Lawrence frequently went over to the widow's cottage for half an
hour on a summer's evening, and he would dig up the bit of ground in
front of her cottage, and had planted it with nice healthy cabbage
plants of his own raising.

Mr. Graham used frequently to say that Granny Hale was a blessing to
the juvenile folk of Hazelbrook, as her helplessness called forth so
many little acts of self-denial on their part.

Six years had passed away since Tom Hale ran off to sea; and every one
had long since numbered him among the dead—every one but his mother.
She prayed for him night and morning, just the same as if he had been
constantly with her.

"He will come back, I am sure he will come back; it may be many years
hence, but I feel certain he'll come."

She would talk thus confidently of her son's return to Mabel, who
rarely let a day pass without a visit to Granny. And Mabel almost
learned to share in the mother's feelings of certainty, for she had
been abroad at the time of Tom's departure, and was, besides, too young
to have known many of the circumstances of the case.

At last, on a certain Thursday, as we have already heard, Granny Hale
took to her bed. She had taken cold, and had a severe rheumatic attack
in her limbs. Sunday morning came, and the boy who brought the bag of
letters to Hazelbrook Hollow, brought also one directed to Mrs. Hale at
Woodside Cottage. The postmaster had sent the letter to the "Hollow,"
knowing that there would be sure to be some one going thence to Mrs.
Hale's in the course of the day.

The letter was given to Mabel, who ran with it to her mother.

"Mamma, there is a letter for Granny Hale; I am sure it is from her
son."

Lady Tracy smiled at her daughter's enthusiasm. But when she examined
the letter, and saw the words "Ship letter" stamped on the outside, she
owned that Mabel might, after all, be right in her conjecture. With the
natural eagerness of youth, Mabel was for setting off at once to take
the letter to Woodside Cottage. But her mamma told her that in Granny
Hale's weak state, the shock, even though a pleasant one, might be
too much for her. The doctor was expected at the "Hollow" early that
morning, to see one of the servants who had met with a slight accident,
and Lady Tracy advised her daughter to wait and consult him before she
took any steps about the letter.

Dr. Allen came soon after breakfast, and was soon informed of the
arrival of the letter, and requested to advise what was best to be
done. He had passed the widow's cottage on his way, and had just looked
in to see how she was. He found her no worse; he almost thought she
was slightly better than on the preceding day, but said that very much
would depend on the nature of the letter, and that he could scarcely
give an opinion until he knew the contents. At length, it was decided
that the letter should be opened, and they would then be able to see
how far it would be advisable to tell Mrs. Hale.

Mabel watched her father's face as he read the letter, and could
scarcely contain herself until he had finished it.

"I know I am right, by papa's look," said she, in a whisper to her
mother.

She was right, and Widow Hale's prayers had been heard. Tom Hale had
led a life of great trouble since the day on which he had so wickedly
deserted his mother. The vessel in which he had sailed had been
attacked by pirates off the coast of Borneo, and he had been taken
prisoner with several others. He had been very cruelly treated; and
when, after two or three years, he managed to escape, and reach a
European settlement, a violent fever, the result of so much hardship
and privation, brought him almost to the grave.

He was in a hospital for many, many months, utterly unable to move. And
when at last he was partially restored to health, he succeeded with
difficulty in getting employment on board a ship going to Calcutta.

The cholera was raging violently in Calcutta, and Tom Hale was one
of the first of the crew to be attacked by it. But even now God's
righteous judgments were tempered with mercy, and Tom would afterwards
look back on that period of suffering as the turning-point of his whole
life. Until then, his troubles had only still more hardened his heart.
But whilst in the cholera hospital at Calcutta, he was visited by a
pious missionary, who was made God's chosen instrument to bend Tom's
proud and stubborn will, and to lead him to Christ.

Tom had confided the history of his past life to this kind minister,
and it was he who had now written to Mrs. Hale, to tell her of her
son's existence, and of the merciful change which God's Holy Spirit had
worked in his heart. Tom's health had been so weakened by the severe
illness that the medical men decided it would be utterly useless for
him to attempt any longer to follow a sailor's life. But they promised
to interest themselves to procure him a passage home as soon as he was
strong enough to undertake the voyage; and they gave him hopes that his
health would become better when once again in his native air.

Such were the contents of the letter; and from the time it had been
reaching England, Sir Herbert thought it probable that Tom might be
expected home in a fortnight, at the utmost. Dr. Allen did not seem to
think that the news would have an injurious effect on Granny Hale—that
is, if told gently; and Mabel begged so hard to be allowed to be the
bearer of the good tidings, that her parents at length consented.

There was not then time for Mabel to go to Woodside Cottage before
church, so her visit was postponed until the afternoon.

When she arrived at the cottage, Granny Hale was sitting up in bed,
and seemed much better than she had done the day before; and little
Mary Wood was reading to her out of the old family Bible. Every Sunday
Mrs. Hale made a point of having read to her the chapter containing
the account of the prodigal son. There seemed some connection in her
mind between the prodigal's return and her lost son; at all events, she
never missed asking for it to be read to her, and the tears would flow
from her poor sightless eyes. And with clasped hands, she would say,
when the parable was finished,—

"HE will be found again some day. I know he will; God is so merciful."

It was generally Mabel who read that chapter to her; but on the Sunday
in question she was unable, as we said before, to go to see Granny in
the morning, and accordingly, when she entered the widow's bedroom in
the afternoon, little Mary had just read the parable, and Granny Hale
was sitting up with clasped hands and the tears rolling down her cheeks.

"Dear Miss Mabel," said she as Mabel entered the room, "I'm so glad to
see you. I was half afraid you were not coming to-day."

Granny Hale always talked of "seeing" people, and still called Mabel
her little "sunbeam."

"I am sorry I could not come before, Granny, and still more sorry that
I was not here to read your favourite chapter to you."

"Mary has read it very nicely," said Mrs. Hale; "she's a dear good
child, I don't know what I should do without her."

Mary blushed with pleasure at being praised before "Miss Mabel."

"But I had such a particular reason for wishing to read that chapter to
you myself to-day," said Mabel.

"Well, then, suppose we read it again," suggested Mrs. Hale; "I am sure
I should never be tired of hearing it, that I shouldn't."

So Mabel read the beautiful and touching history of the prodigal, in
her own simple, earnest manner. Perhaps there was a shade more of
earnestness in her tone this day than usual, for her heart was full,
and every word seemed so suited to the present occasion.

"I'm sure he will be found," murmured Granny Hale, as Mabel paused.

"I think so too, Granny."

"Do you, Miss Mabel? I'm glad to hear you say that; you didn't always
think so."

"Perhaps I have better reason for thinking so now than formerly,
Granny."

Mabel spoke very calmly and gently, but the mother's ear detected
something different in the tone of her voice. She stretched out her
hand to grasp that of Mabel.

"Better reason, better reason—you've not heard anything of him, have
you? Oh, tell me if you have, dear Miss Mabel, and do not keep me in
suspense."

And Mabel told her all, and read her the letter over and over again,
and then left her, overpowered with joy and gratitude, and repeating to
herself,—

"My son, my dear son! 'He was dead, and is alive again; he was lost,
and is found.'"

Granny Hale got better rapidly. That blessed letter, she said, had done
her more good than all the medicine in the world. Before the end of the
week, she was able to be downstairs again, and as the probable time for
her son's arrival drew nearer, she would sit at her cottage door for
hours together, listening to catch the sound of strange footsteps.

It was about three weeks after the receipt of the letter from Calcutta,
that, one afternoon, a sunburnt man, carrying over his shoulder a
bundle tied to a stick, sat resting himself on a stile not very far
from Hazelbrook Hollow. He was about twenty years of age, and appeared
to be in delicate health, for he put down his bundle with a weary look.
We need not tell the reader that it was Tom Hale.

Many mingled thoughts, some of them very sad ones too, seemed to crowd
his mind as he sat on the stile. His wasted youth, his broken-down
health, his forsaken parent,—yes, they were bitter thoughts; and for a
time the wanderer seemed almost overpowered by them. Then a ray of hope
dawned upon his troubled soul. It might not yet be too late to make up,
in some slight degree, to his poor mother for all the sorrow he had
caused her.

If she were still alive, he—but the doubt itself was terrible; and
falling on his knees, he prayed that God would, in His mercy, spare him
this last great grief, and would bless his efforts, and give him grace
to be a good son for the future. He arose from his knees comforted;
but unable to bear the uncertainty as to whether his mother were alive
or dead, he called to some labouring men who were going along the road
at some little distance, and asked them if he was far from Hazelbrook
Hollow.

"You're only a short distance, master," said they; "keep straight
across the fields yonder; you can't miss your way. You'll pass a
cottage close to a wood."

Tom Hale knew that cottage well.

"I know my way then, if I am to pass that cottage. Can you tell me who
lives there now?"

"Old Granny Hale."

What joy it was to Tom to hear his mother's name! She was alive, then.

"She still lives there, then?"

"Yes; Sir Herbert wouldn't turn her away, poor thing, when she became
blind."

"Blind! Is Mrs. Hale blind?"

"You must be a stranger in these parts not to know that. She has been
blind ever since the fever she had when that good-for-nothing son of
hers ran away, years ago."

The men passed on, and Tom Hale lifted his bundle, and took the
well-known path across the fields. When he reached the last field
before he came to his mother's cottage, his agitation became so great
that he quickened his pace almost to a run.

Granny Hale was sitting at her door in the warm afternoon sunshine. Her
knitting was on her lap, but her thoughts were far away, and her work
had been forgotten.

Suddenly a hasty step was heard approaching.

Her cheeks became very pale, as half rising from her chair, she leaned
forward to catch the sound more distinctly.

The garden gate opened, and the same step, now subdued, came gently up
the path. In another instant, a pair of manly arms were thrown around
her, and the fond mother and her repentant son had met to part no more
on earth.



CHAPTER VII

Safe at Home

TOM HALE'S health improved greatly under the influence of his native
air. Dr. Allen told him he must never expect to be a very robust man,
but that there was nothing to prevent him from becoming a useful
farm labourer and that outdoor exercise would be the best possible
occupation for him. Sir Herbert Tracy gave him employment on his
estate, and although Tom had everything to learn and felt every day
more and more convinced of his former folly, still he carried a willing
mind to his new work, and soon made progress in it.

His mother was very happy; for Tom showed evident proofs of the change
that God's Holy Spirit had wrought in his heart. His greatest delight
was to spend his evenings in his mother's cottage, reading to her,
and he seemed anxious to meet her slightest wish. On Sundays, it was
a pleasing and affecting sight to see the blind woman, leaning on her
son's arm, and going with him to the house of God. She seemed as though
she could trust herself anywhere under his care.

Mr. Graham spoke to Tom one day, saying how glad he was to see him so
attentive to his mother.

"Don't speak so, please, sir," said Tom; "if I were to live a hundred
years and she to be spared to me all the time, I could never repay her
for all I have made her suffer."

Fanny Price was now a constant attendant at the Sunday school. She and
Katie Lawrence used generally to go together. The good impressions had
been lasting ones, and Mrs. Lawrence had no longer any occasion to warn
Katie against Fanny's society.

Katie also had never forgotten the lesson she had received, and
was become all that her mother could desire. She was not fond of
needlework, and frequently thought she would much prefer going to
service; but she knew how much her mother would miss her at home, and,
like a dutiful daughter, she tried to be contented, and to do her duty
in that state of life in which God had placed her.

Mrs. Lawrence required Katie's help more now than ever; for, as the
summer faded into autumn, dear little Nelly's feeble strength seemed
also to decline. And a physician whom Lady Tracy kindly consulted, gave
it as his opinion that she would not outlive the coming winter. He
said, likewise, that even if spared, her life could never be other than
a life of pain and suffering; and the knowledge of this tended greatly
to lessen Mrs. Lawrence's grief at the thought of so soon losing her
child.

The physician proved right in his opinion. Calmly and peacefully,
without much pain, the stream of Nelly's little life ebbed gradually
away. She had no fear of death. She had been enabled, by God's mercy,
to throw herself entirely on the merits of her Saviour, and felt the
blessed peace-giving assurance that He had borne her sins for her, and
that through His stripes she was healed. Weak and sinful as she knew
herself to be, she had learned to look with the eye of faith beyond
this passing life to that bright abode, where "there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more
pain."

And thus did little Nelly, one fine morning in early winter, peacefully
and happily "fall asleep in Jesus." Loving friends were around her
bed—that good and pious mother who had brought up her children in God's
holy fear, and kind, gentle Mabel Tracy who had so helped, with God's
blessing, to lead her in the right way. Katie, too, more than ever her
sister lately, since she also had learned to love her Saviour; and
good, honest-hearted Ben, and little Tom and Willie.

The last words Nelly uttered were the concluding lines of the hymn she
was always so fond of, and which she repeated almost in a whisper, as
if taking a farewell of all her dear ones on earth,—

   "'Oh! that will be joyful,
       Joyful, joyful, joyful,
     When we meet to part no more.'"

Nelly was buried near her father, in a corner of the quiet village
churchyard. And in the early days of spring, her grave was surrounded
by sweet spring flowers, planted by her affectionate brother Ben.

It was some months after Nelly's death, that one morning Katie had gone
to Hazelbrook Hollow to take home some needlework which she and her
mother had just finished. She was about leaving to return home, when
the housekeeper called her into the room, and told her that she had
heard from a daughter of hers who was a lady's-maid in a large family,
that the lady of the house was in want of a young girl to assist in
the nursery. Mrs. Hall—that was the housekeeper's name—had immediately
thought of Katie.

"It will be a good beginning for you, child," she said; "you will have
eight pounds a year, and many advantages. You had better speak to your
mother at once, and let me know as soon as you can, for I have promised
to write in a day or two."

For a moment Katie's face flushed with pleasure; it was just what
she should like, just what she had so often wished for. But the next
minute, the flush faded from her cheek, and in a low, but firm voice
she said,—

"I thank you very much, Mrs. Hall, but I must say 'No' to your kind
offer."

"You had better think twice before you refuse so good a chance, Katie;
such things are not to be met with every day, I can tell you."

"I know that, Mrs. Hall, and I should like it very much, but it would
not be right of me to leave mother," said Katie. "Dear little Nelly is
gone, and she would miss me sadly; for Esther is as yet quite young,
and there are the two little boys to see to, and mother herself is not
very strong. No, Mrs. Hall, I have quite made up my mind; and please
say nothing to mother about it, for she might think I should be sorry
not to be able to accept so good an offer."

"I believe you are right, Katie, and you'll not lose anything by your
dutiful affection to your mother, depend upon it."

"Don't you think Fanny Price might do for the place, Mrs. Hall?" asked
Katie. "She has not so good a home as I have, and I know she would be
glad to hear of a situation; and Mrs. Graham would recommend her now:
she told her so the other day."

"Send Fanny to me, Katie, and I'll speak to her about it."

Fanny Price got the situation, and prospered in it; and Mrs. Lawrence
never knew of her daughter's generous self-denial.

Katie remained at home with her mother until she was twenty-two years
old, and then only left her mother's roof to be married to Tom Hale,
who was now in receipt of good wages under Sir Herbert Tracy. Granny
Hale had become much more infirm, and needed the help of her son's
wife. Katie made a good wife and a good daughter. There was no neater,
cleaner cottage and no happier home in all Hazelbrook than hers.

"The blessing of the Lord," which "maketh rich, and addeth no sorrow,"
was richly enjoyed by her and her husband. They could both say, in the
words of the wise king, "Good understanding giveth favour: but the way
of transgressors is hard."



    _Printed in Great Britain by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld._
                    _London and Aylesbury._






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAPPINESS OF HAZELBROOK ***




Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”

    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.

    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.

    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

